## 36 Hyperlipidaemias

Figure 36.1 Mechanisms of action of drugs used to treat hyperlipidaemias Dietary linida Stating Liver LDL-R expression increased Inhibit by PCS9K inhibitors Bile acid Bile duct HMG-CoA reductase sequestrants Nicotinic acid Bile Inhibits LDL-R release Inhibits breakdown Bind Arterial wall Portal vein OxLDI. -→ Atherogenesis Intestines Remnant CETP Cholesterol Fatty acids NPC1L1 Cholesterol and TG Stimulate Inhibits Excretion of bound Muscle, adipose tissue Fibrat.ea bile acide Lacteal Ezetimibe

ll cells require **lipids** (fats) to synthesize membranes and provide energy. Lipids are transported in the blood as **lipoproteins**. These small particles consist of a core of **triglycerides** and **cholesteryl esters**, surrounded by a coat of **phospholipids**, **cholesterol** and proteins termed **apolipoproteins** or **apoproteins**. Apoproteins stabilize the lipoprotein particles and help target specific types of lipoprotein to various tissues. **Hyperlipidaemias** are abnormalities of lipoprotein levels which promote the development of **atherosclerosis** (see Chapter 37) and coronary heart disease (CHD; see Chapters 40–42, 44, 45).

## **Lipoproteins and lipid transport**

Figure 36.1 illustrates pathways of lipid transport in the body. The **exogenous** pathway (left side of Figure 36.1) delivers ingested lipids to the body tissues and liver. Ingested triglycerides and cholesterol are transported by the protein Niemann–Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1) into the mucosal cells lining the intestinal lumen, which combine them with apoprotein **apo B-48**, forming **nascent chylomicrons** 

which are secreted into the lymph, pass into the bloodstream, and combine with apo E and apo C-II to become **chylomicrons**. These bind to the capillary endothelium in muscle and adipose tissue, where apo CII activates the endothelium-bound enzyme **lipoprotein lipase** (LPL). LPL hydrolyses the triglycerides to fatty acids which enter the tissues. The liver takes up the residual **chylomicron remnants**. These are broken down to yield cholesterol, which the liver also synthesizes. The rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis is **hydroxy-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase** (HMG-CoA reductase). The liver uses cholesterol to make **bile acids**. These pass into the intestine and act to solubilize dietary cholesterol so it can be absorbed via NPC1L1. Bile acids are almost entirely reabsorbed and returned to the liver, although about 0.5 g/day is lost in the faeces, providing a path by which the body excretes cholesterol.

The **endogenous** pathway (right side of Figure 36.1) cycles lipids between the liver and peripheral tissues. The liver forms and secretes nascent **very low-density lipoproteins** (VLDLs), consisting mainly of triglycerides with some cholesterol and apo B-100, into the lacteal

vessels. These acquire apo E and apo C‐II from HDL in the plasma to become VLDL. As with chylomicrons, apo C‐II activates LPL causing VLDL triglyceride hydrolysis and provision of fatty acids to body tissues. As it is progressively drained of triglycerides, VLDL becomes **intermediate density lipoprotein** (IDL) and then **low‐ density lipoprotein** (LDL), losing all of its apoproteins (to HDL) except for **apo B‐100** in the process. Most LDL, which contains mainly cholesteryl esters (CE), is taken up by the liver; the rest serves to distribute cholesterol to the peripheral tissues. Cells regulate their cholesterol uptake by expressing more LDL receptors (which bind to apo B‐100) when their cholesterol requirement increases.

Cholesterol is removed from tissues by **high‐density lipoprotein** (HDL). HDL is initially assembled in the plasma from lipids and apoproteins (mainly **apo A1,** but also apo C‐II and apo E) lost by other lipoproteins, and then progressively accumulates cholesterol (which it stores as CE) from body tissues. **Cholesteryl ester transfer protein** (CETP), which is in the plasma, transfers these from HDL to VLDL, IDL and LDL, which return them to the liver. This process by which HDL transports cholesterol to the liver from the rest of the body is termed **reverse cholesterol transport** and may explain why plasma HDL levels are inversely proportional to the risk of developing CHD.

## Hyperlipidaemias: types and treatments

**Primary hyperlipidaemias** are caused by genetic abnormalities affecting apoproteins, apoprotein receptors or enzymes involved in lipoprotein metabolism, and occur in about 1 in 500 people. **Secondary hyperlipidaemias** are caused by conditions or drugs (e.g. diabetes, renal disease, alcohol abuse, thiazide diuretics) affecting lipoprotein metabolism. However, hypercholesterolaemia is most commonly caused by consumption of a diet high in saturated fats, probably because this decreases hepatic lipoprotein clearance. Although hyperlipidaemia often involves simply an excess of LDL cholesterol (LDL‐C), many people, especially those with *metabolic syndrome* (see Chapter 34) have a combination of high LDL‐C, high triglycerides (high VLDL), and low HDL cholesterol (HDL‐C) levels in their plasma. This pattern is thought to confer a particularly large risk of developing CHD.

The treatment of hyperlipidaemias aims to slow or reverse the progression of atherosclerotic lesions by lowering LDL‐C and/or triglycerides and to raise HDL‐C. Although the US has abandoned formal cholesterol target levels, current European guidelines state that plasma LDL‐C should be <115 mg/dL (3 mmol/L) for those who are at moderate risk of developing CHD, <100 mg/dL (2.5mmol/L) for high‐risk patients, and <70 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L) for very high‐risk patients. Treatment often begins with a low fat, high carbohydrate diet. If this fails to normalize hyperlipidaemia adequately after 3 months, therapy with a lipid‐lowering drug is considered. The vast majority of those with high LDL‐C receive 'statins', which have been consistently shown to reduce CHD and the mortality it causes. Those with high triglycerides and low HDL‐C may also be given 'fibrates' or niacin.

**HMG‐CoA reductase inhibitors** or '**statins**' include **simvastatin, lovastatin, pravastatin, fluvastatin, mevastatin, atorvastatin** and **rosuvastatin**. The landmark **Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study** (4S) reported in 1994 that simvastatin reduced cardiovascular mortality by 42% over a 6‐year period in CHD patients with high LDL‐C. Statins act by reducing hepatic synthesis of cholesterol, causing an upregulation of hepatic receptors for B and E apoproteins. This increases the clearance of LDL, IDL and VLDL from the plasma. Statins also modestly increase plasma HDL‐C levels by an unknown mechanism. Although the main benefits of statins result from their lipid‐lowering effects, they also probably reduce CHD through additional mechanisms. These include an enhancement of nitric oxide release, possibly due to activation of the PI3K–Akt pathway (see Chapter 24), and also anti‐inflammatory and antithrombotic effects. Some of these effects occur because the inhibition of HMG‐CoA reduces cellular concentrations of lipids required for the functioning of the monomeric G proteins Rho (Rho acts to suppress eNOS expression) and Ras (Ras stimulates NFκB, which is involved in the expression of many pro‐inflammatory genes).

Serious statin‐associated adverse effects are rare. They include hepatoxicity and rhabdomyolysis (destruction of skeletal muscle), the risk of which is increased with concomitant use of nicotinic acid or a fibric acid derivative. Statin use also increases the chances of developing type 2 DM, especially in those already at risk of developing this disease, although the both the magnitude of this effect and its clinical relevance remain hotly debated.

**Niacin (nicotinic acid)** or **fibrates (fibric acid derivatives)** are used in patients who are receiving statins but whose triglyceride levels are too high and HDL‐C levels are too low. Niacin is a B vitamin that inhibits the synthesis and release of VLDL by the liver. Because VLDL gives rise to IDL and LDL, plasma levels of these lipoproteins also fall. Conversely, HDL levels rise significantly as a result of decreased breakdown. Most patients experience flushing with niacin therapy due to vasodilatation caused by prostaglandin release from the endothelium; this can be prevented by non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs. Other adverse effects include hepatotoxicity, palpitations, impaired glucose tolerance, hyperuricaemia, hypotension and amblyopia.

Fibrates include **gemfibrozil**, **clofibrate**, **bezafibrate**, **ciprofibrate** and **fenofibrate**. Fibrates bind to peroxisome proliferator‐ activated receptor alpha (PPARα) to stimulate the expression and activity of LPL, thereby reducing VLDL triglycerides by increasing their hydrolysis. They also promote changes in LDL composition, which render it less atherogenic, and enhance fibrolysis. They cause mild gastrointestinal disorders in 5–10% of patients and can potentially cause muscle toxicity and renal failure if combined with HMG‐CoA reductase inhibitors or excessive alcohol use.

**Bile acid sequestrants:** bile acids are synthesized from cholesterol in the liver, and cycle between the liver and intestine (enterohepatic recirculation). **Cholestyramine** and **colestipol** bind and trap bile acids in the intestine, increasing their excretion. This enhances hepatic bile acid synthesis and cholesterol utilization. The resulting depletion of hepatic cholesterol upregulates LDL receptors, increasing the clearance of LDL‐C from the plasma. These drugs must be taken in large amounts (up to 30 g/day) and cause gastrointestinal side effects such as emesis, diarrhoea and reflux oesophagitis, so are rarely used.

**Ezetimibe** reduces absorption of dietary cholesterol by inhibiting **NPC1L1**. This reduces the plasma concentration and hepatic uptake of chylomicrons. The liver responds to this by expressing more LDL receptors to maintain its cholesterol uptake, and plasma LDL‐C levels fall by ∼15%. The IMPROVE‐IT study showed that adding ezetimibe to simvastatin treatment in patients recently hospitalized with an acute coronary syndrome further lowered cholesterol by 23% and reduced the occurrence of subsequent major cardiovascular events by 6% over 7 years.

**Alirocumab** and **evolocumab** are antibodies which inhibit **proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9** (PCSK9), a protein in liver cells which ferries LDL receptors (LDL‐R) to lysosomes, where they are destroyed. PCS9K inhibitors thus increase the number of LDL receptors in the hepatocyte membrane, enhancing the clearance of LDL‐C from the plasma. The FOURIER trial reported that evolocumab reduced plasma LDL‐C by a remarkable 59% in patients already receiving statins and decreased the incidence of myocardial infarction and ischaemic stroke by ~25% over 2 years.