# Glossary

#### A

**absorption atelectasis** Atelectasis (lung collapse) resulting from the absorption of oxygen from obstructed or partially obstructed alveoli. **acinus** The smallest division of a gland; a subdivision of the lung consisting of the tissue distal to a terminal bronchiole including respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveoli, and all other structures within.

acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema Fluid accumulation in the air spaces and parenchyma of the lungs due to increased capillary hydrostatic pressure secondary to elevated pulmonary venous pressure. acute hypercapnic respiratory failure Inability to maintain normal  $PCO_2$ , resulting in a  $PaCO_2 > 50$  mmHg) over a relatively short period of time.

acute hypoxemic respiratory failure Severely decreased oxygenation (PaO $_2$  <50 mm Hg) that results in compromised respiratory function over a relatively short period of time.

acute-on-chronic respiratory failure An acute exacerbation of hypoxemic or hypercapnic respiratory failure in a patient with chronic respiratory failure (i.e., COPD patient who demonstrate chronic elevation of PaCO<sub>2</sub> or decreased PaO<sub>2</sub>).

Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) A method of classifying the severity of illnesses in patients; a scoring system used to predict outcome.

acute respiratory failure (ARF) Any condition in which respiratory activity is completely absent or inadequate to maintain oxygen uptake and carbon dioxide clearance.

acute severe asthma Also known as status asthmaticus. Severe asthma episode unresponsive to repeated courses of  $\beta$ -2 agonist therapy. Emergency that requires immediate recognition and treatment

**adaptive support ventilation** A patient-centered method of closed-loop mechanical ventilation that increases or decreases ventilatory support based on monitored patient parameters.

afterload The impedance that the ventricles must overcome to eject blood into the great vessels.

airway opening pressure ( $P_{awo}$ ) Pressure at the upper airway (nose and mouth); also called mouth pressure ( $P_{M}$ ), airway pressure ( $P_{aw}$ ), upper airway pressure, mask pressure, and proximal airway pressure. airway pressure ( $P_{aw}$ ) Pressure in the upper airway; also called mouth pressure ( $P_{M}$ ), airway pressure ( $P_{aw}$ ), upper airway pressure, mask pressure, and proximal airway pressure.

**alveolar dead space** Alveoli that are ventilated but not perfused by pulmonary capillary blood flow (e.g., pulmonary embolism). **alveolar distending pressure** The pressure difference between the inside of the lung and the outside of the lung, which is responsible for maintaining alveolar inflation; also called *transpulmonary pressure*.

**amplitude** The maximum value of a periodic curve or wave measured along the vertical axis.

analgesics Agents that reduce pain without causing a loss of consciousness.

anesthetic Drug or agent used to abolish the sensation of pain. anterograde amnesia Condition in which the acquisition and encoding of new information that can potentially lead to memories of unpleasant experiences is prevented.

anterograde amnesia Inability to create new memories after the event that causes amnesia

**ascites** An abnormal accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal space. **assist-control** (A/C) **ventilation** See *continuous mandatory ventilation*.

**assisted breaths** When all or part of the breath is generated by the ventilator and the ventilator is providing part of the work of breathing for the patient.

**assisted ventilation** Breath delivery that is aided by the use of a mechanical ventilatory device.

**asynchrony** (dyssynchrony) See *patient—ventilator asynchrony*. **automatic tube compensation** A feature available in some ventilators that provides adjustable compensation for the work of breathing through an artificial airway.

**auto-PEEP** Inadvertent PEEP that is not set by the operator but results in a buildup of positive pressure in the lungs at the end of exhalation; commonly caused by high minute ventilation settings, particularly in the presence of airway obstruction, which result in incomplete exhalation of an inspired volume.

**Autorigger** A machine-triggered breath that occurs without the patient making an inspiratory effort.

# В

back pressure Pressure that builds in a tube or circuit and increases and extends backward through the tube if the normal point of exit (egress) is blocked and not restored.

balloon-tipped, flow-directed catheter The balloon-tipped, flow-directed catheter (also referred to as the *Swan-Ganz catheter* or *pulmonary artery catheter*) is a multiple-lumen catheter constructed of radiopaque polyvinylchloride.

barotrauma Injury to the lung parenchyma caused by excessive pressures in the lungs.

baseline pressure The pressure from which inspiration begins and at which expiration ends during mechanical ventilation; also known as *expiratory pressure*. Normal baseline pressure is atmospheric. Positive pressures can be applied to increase the baseline above atmospheric.

baseline variable Airway pressures measured relative to a baseline value (e.g., zero mm Hg or atmospheric pressure).

bilevel PAP A ventilatory mode that is a variation on CPAP therapy. It is characterized by the inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) that is greater than the expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP).

biofilm A thin, mucous film of bacteria that attaches to a surface. Biot respirations Periods of apnea (10–30 seconds) followed by periods of breathing at a uniform depth; associated with central nervous system disorders (e.g., meningitis) and increased intracranial pressure.

bradycardia Heart rates in the adult less than 60 beats/min. bronchial alveolar lavage (BAL) Medical procedure in which a bronchoscope is passed through the mouth or nose into the lungs and fluid is instilled into a small part of the lung and then recollected for examination.

bronchomalacia Weak cartilage in the walls of the bronchial tubes, occurring in children younger than 6 months, presenting with noisy breathing and/or wheezing. There is collapse of a mainstem bronchus on expiration.

bronchopleural fistulas A hole or opening between the lung and pleural space producing an air communication between the two.

bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) A chronic respiratory disorder that often occurs in infants exposed to long-term ventilation. Lung tissue is scarred, and pulmonary arterial walls are thickened. Mismatching of ventilation and pulmonary perfusion exists.

549

#### C

**capnography** Graphic display of exhaled carbon dioxide concentration using a capnograph.

cardiac index Cardiac output divided by body surface area. cardiac tamponade Compression of the heart caused by fluid or air in the pericardial sac; also caused by positive pressure in the lungs around the outside of the heart.

cardiac transmural pressure The pressure difference between the inside of the heart and the intrathoracic pressure.

cardiac work An estimate of the amount of work the heart must perform to eject the stroke volume.

cardiogenic pulmonary edema (CPE) Accumulation of fluid (plasma) in the pulmonary interstitial and alveolar spaces as a result of increased pulmonary capillary pressure typically associated with left heart failure.

**central venous lines** Catheters placed near or in the right atrium to measure central venous pressure.

**chest-abdominal paradox** When the chest wall and abdomen move the opposite of normal during breathing. The chest wall goes inward on inspiration while the abdomen is moving outward, and vice versa. See also *respiratory alternans*.

chest cuirass The shell-like device that fits over the thorax for the delivery of negative pressure ventilation.

Cheyne-Stokes respiration A pattern of breathing with apneas lasting 10 to 30 seconds, followed by gradual increase in the depth and rate of breaths; associated with cerebral disorders, congestive heart failure, and alterations in acid—base status such as in metabolic problems.

choanal atresia A congenital abnormality in which a bony or membranous obstruction blocks the passage between the nose and pharynx; can result in serious respiratory problems in the neonate.

cleft palate A congenital defect in which a fissure occurs in the midline of the palate; often associated with a cleft in the upper lip. Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) An approach to clinical diagnosis that includes six clinical assessments with each item given a score of 0 to 2 points. The assessment criteria include fever, leukocyte count, quantity and purulence of tracheal secretions, oxygenation status, the type of radiographic abnormality, and results of a tracheal aspirate culture and Gram stain.

closed-loop system A feedback control scheme in which the actual output is measured and compared with the desired input set on the control panel (user interface). An error signal is sent to the controller if a specified difference is found between the input value and the measured output.

community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) A common infectious respiratory disease characterized by inflammation of lung tissue, acquired outside the hospital setting by inhalation or aspiration of pathogenic organisms into a lung segment or lobe. A pneumonia contracted from the environment as opposed to being acquired within a medical facility (e.g., hospital-acquired pneumonia), CAP is usually more sensitive to antibiotics.

**compliance** (C) The relative ease with which the structure distends; the opposite, or inverse, of elastance (e). C = 1/e or e = 1/C. **compressible volume** The volume of gas in the patient (ventilator) circuit that stays in the circuit during inspiration; also referred to as the *compressible volume* or the *volume lost as a result of tubing compliance*  $(C_T)$ .

**continuous mandatory ventilation** (CMV) Term used most often to describe a mode that is time or patient triggered, volume or pressure targeted, and volume or time cycled. Every breath is mandatory. Also known as *controlled mechanical ventilation* and *continuous mechanical ventilation*.

continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) Positive pressure applied to the spontaneously breathing patient during both inspiration and expiration; used for the treatment of obstructive

sleep apnea and to increase mean airway pressure in critically ill patients who are able to do some spontaneous breathing. contractility Cardiac contractility is related to the force that the ventricle generates during each cardiac cycle. The value can be estimated by using the ejection fraction.

control mode Mechanical ventilatory mode in which the ventilator controls the inspiratory pressure, volume, flow, or time. control system The internal components of a ventilator that interpret what the operator sets on the control panel (user interface).

**control variable** The primary variable the ventilator control circuit adjusts to cause inspiration.

**controlled ventilation** Time triggering of all breaths, with breath rate established by the ventilator.

**cor pulmonale** Enlargement (hypertrophy) or failure of the right heart and pulmonary hypertension caused by certain pulmonary parenchymal or pulmonary vascular disorders.

**critical opening pressure** The pressure required to open a collapsed lung unit.

Cushing response A normal response to acute increases in intracranial pressure, which results in hypertension with bradycardia.

cycle variable The phase variable that ends inspiration. cycling mechanism The variable by which the ventilator marks the

end of inspiration. **cytokines** A group of low-molecular-weight proteins secreted by specific cells; involved in cell-to-cell communication and a variety of immune responses.

# D

decannulation Removal of a tracheostomy tube.

**deep sulcus sign (chest radiograph)** A radiographic sign indicative of the presence of a pneumothorax.

**de-escalation** An important method that can be used to reduce the incidence of multidrug-resistant pathogens because it reduces unnecessary use of antibiotics.

**deflation point** The upper inflection point on the deflation portion of the curve (UIPd), also called the *deflection point* or *deflation point*. Point at which lungs begin to collapse.

deflection point Part of the information obtained during a lung recruitment maneuver. After a full inspiration to total lung capacity, a deflation is performed and graphs are established for pressure—volume points similar to the inflation curve. A deflection point occurs where a large number of lung units collapse quickly. The deflection point is the upper inflection point during deflation. delay-time control A comfort feature incorporated in many noninvasive pressure-targeted ventilators that allows the user to set a period of time that must elapse before inspiratory and expiratory pressures achieve prescribed levels. A very low pressure and continuous flow of gas will continue through the circuit during this interval of time. It is most often used in conjunction with the ramp feature. See *ramp*.

**depolarizing agents** Agents that cause skeletal muscle paralysis by causing a reversal of the resting membrane potential in excitable cell membranes.

diastole The period of cardiac relaxation and filling during the cardiac cycle.

**double-circuit ventilator** A ventilator in which the primary power source generates a gas flow that compresses another mechanism such as a bag or bellows.

dP/dT Change in pressure relative to time.

**drive mechanism** The mechanical device that causes gas flow to the patient.

**dynamic characteristic** Characteristic of lung function during a breath (e.g., dynamic compliance).

dyssynchrony (asynchrony) See patient-ventilator asynchrony.

# E

early-onset pneumonia Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) that develops between 48 and 72 hours after tracheal intubation. Calculated as the ratio of the stroke volume to the ventricular end-diastolic volume.

elastance (e) The tendency of a structure to return to its original form after being stretched or acted on by an outside force. Elastance (e) is the inverse of compliance (C); e = 1/C.

electrical activity of the diaphragm (Edi) A minimally invasive bedside technique used in conjunction with neurally adjusted ventilator assist (NAVA) that gives information on the patient's diaphragm activity.

endogenous Growing inside the body; originating from inside the body or produced from internal causes. Compare *exogenous*. equation of motion Mathematical equation that describes the relationships among pressure, volume, and flow during a spontaneous or mechanical breath.

erosive esophagitis Inflammation of the mucosal lining of the esophagus in which erosion occurs to the tissues. Causes include infection and irritation from a nasogastric tube or from backflow of gastric fluids from the stomach into the esophagus.

**esophageal pressure** Pressure measured from a balloon placed in the esophagus; used to estimate pressures and pressure changes in the pleural space.

**exogenous** Located or originating from outside the body (e.g., a foreign bacteria causing an infection).

**expiratory positive airway pressure** (EPAP) The application of positive pressure to the airway during exhalation. Compare *inspiratory positive airway pressure*.

external circuit See patient circuit.

**external respiration** The movement of oxygen and carbon dioxide across the alveolar capillary membrane.

extracorporeal membrane oxygenation A procedure in which venous blood is pumped out of the body to a heart—lung machine, where it is oxygenated and returned to the body.

**extrinsic PEEP** Positive end-expiratory pressure applied by the operator.

exudative Related to the oozing of fluid and other substances from cells and tissues; usually a result of infection or injury.

## F

**fiberoptic bronchoscopy** Technique to examine breathing passages (airways) of the lungs using a thin flexible or rigid tube called a *bronchoscope* that is placed in the nose or mouth. The tip contains a small camera that projects onto a video screen.

**fibrosing alveolitis** A form of alveolar inflammation accompanied by dyspnea and hypoxia. Chest radiographs show diffuse infiltrates and thickening of the alveolar septa. It occurs with advanced rheumatoid arthritis and other immune disorders.

Fick principle A method for determining perfusion through an organ; based on the oxygen consumption and arterial-to-venous oxygen content difference.

flow-controlled ventilation Mechanical ventilatory mode in which the ventilator controls flow and therefore volume of gas delivered to the patient.

flow cycling When the cycle variable is flow. Inspiration ends when a specific flow is measured during inspiration by the ventilator. For example, pressure support ventilation is flow cycled.

**flow limited** A ventilator is considered flow limited if the flow during ventilation reaches a maximum value before the end of inspiration but does not exceed that value.

flow resistor A device with an orifice of fixed size placed in the expiratory limb of a breathing circuit; used to achieve positive expiratory pressure by creating a resistance to exhaled gas flow. As the diameter of the orifice increases in size, the provided pressure level decreases, and vice versa. Changes in the rate of gas flow also

change the pressure. The higher the expired gas flow, the higher the expiratory pressure generated.

flow triggering Inspiratory flow from the ventilator begins when a set drop of flow through the patient circuit is detected during exhalation.

fractional hemoglobin saturation Calculated by dividing the amount of oxyhemoglobin measured by the amount of all four types of hemoglobin present, or fractional  $O_2Hb = O_2Hb/(HHb + O_2Hb + COHb + MetHb)$ .

French (Fr) size  $\stackrel{.}{A}$  unit of measure. The French size divided by  $\pi$  (3.1416) equals the external diameter of a catheter in millimeters.

frequency control Touch pad control device used to set the number of breaths delivered by a mechanical ventilator.

full ventilatory support (FVS) When the ventilator provides all the energy necessary to maintain effective alveolar ventilation.

functional hemoglobin saturation Calculated by dividing the oxyhemoglobin concentration by the concentration of hemoglobin capable of carrying oxygen, or functional  $O_2Hb = O_2Hb/(HHb + O_2Hb)$ 

functional residual capacity The volume of gas remaining in the lungs at the end of normal exhalation.

# G

gastroprotective agents Agents such as antacids that reduce the risk for gastrointestinal bleeding.

gastrostomy or jejunostomy tube A tube used to introduce nutrients into the stomach or to remove fluids, gas, or poisons; also called a *stomach tube*.

glabella The smooth area on the frontal bone between the superciliary arches.

#### Н

health care—associated pneumonia (HCAP) Afflicts patients who have resided in a long-term care facility or received acute care in an acute care hospital for a specified time before developing pneumonia (i.e., 2 or more days within 90 days of the infection).

heliox A mixture of helium and oxygen, usually in concentrations of 80% helium and 20% oxygen or 70% helium and 30% oxygen; used to reduce the work of breathing by lowering the density of the gas mixture.

hematogenous Originating in the blood or transported in the blood.

hertz (Hz) Unit of measure equivalent to 60 cycles (oscillations) per minute.

heterogeneous Composed of different parts or elements. high-frequency jet ventilation Ventilation that uses rates between about 100 and 600 breaths/min; operates by using a nozzle or an injector, which creates a high-velocity jet of air directed into the lungs. Exhalation is passive.

high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) Uses rates into the thousands, up to about 4000 cycles/min. HFOV ventilators use either a small piston or a device similar to a stereo speaker, both of which deliver gas in a "to-and-fro" motion, pushing gas in during inspiration and drawing gas out during exhalation.

high-frequency positive pressure ventilation High-frequency ventilation that employs a conventional positive pressure set at high respiratory rates (60-100 breaths/min) with lower than normal tidal volumes.

**homeostasis** A consistency or balance in the internal environment of the body, maintained normally by adaptive responses that promote survival and well-being.

homogeneous Comprising similar parts or elements.

hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) Pneumonia that occurs 48 hours or longer after admission to the hospital and results from an infection that was not incubating at the time of admission.

551

**humidity deficit** The difference between what is provided by the humidifier and the amount of humidity required by the patient. **hyperinflation** See *overinflation*.

hyperosmolar A substance or condition with increased osmolarity. hyperthyroidism A condition that results from increased activity of the thyroid gland. An increase in metabolic activity that is characterized by nervousness, tremors, hunger, weight loss, fatigue, palpitations, and related symptoms occurs.

hyperventilation Ventilation in excess of a level required to meet metabolic demands (e.g., PaCO<sub>2</sub> < 30 mm Hg).

hypoventilation A respiratory condition resulting in elevated blood carbon dioxide and generalized reduction in respiratory function. hypoxemia Lower than normal oxygen pressure in the arterial blood. hypoxia Lower than normal oxygen pressure in the alveolus or at the tissue level resulting in an inadequate amount of oxygen available to the body cells to meet their metabolic needs. hysteresis Can be thought of as a lagging of one of two associated phenomena; that is, two associated phenomena fail to coincide or occur simultaneously. An example of hysteresis is the difference between the inspiratory and expiratory curves in a pressure—volume

loop for the lungs.

iatrogenic Caused by a medical procedure or treatment. ileus An obstruction of the intestinal tract associated with immobility of the bowel or a mechanical blockage of the bowel. incisura A small negative deflection on the pressure—time tracing present in the aortic and pulmonary artery pressure tracings; caused by the transient reversal of blood flow toward the heart during the last part of systole that pushes against the respective semilunar valve. independent lung ventilation A form of mechanical ventilation. indirect calorimetry Estimate of the caloric expenditure of the body by measurement of exhaled gas volumes and fractional concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide rather than direct heat production from the body.

**inflammatory mediators** Chemical substances produced by the body that are involved in the inflammatory response.

**inflection point** Occurs during deflation (also sometimes called the *deflection point*) and represents collapse of a significant number of lung units after full inflation (recruitment) of the lungs.

**inspiratory pause** Mechanical ventilator setting that involves a short prolongation of the inspiratory phase of a breath. Inspiratory pause or inflation hold maneuvers are used to measure plateau pressure. **inspiratory positive airway pressure** (**IPAP**) The application of positive pressure to the airway during inspiration. Compare *expiratory positive airway pressure*.

inspissated secretions Airway secretions that are thickened or hardened through the loss or evaporation of the liquid portion. intermittent abdominal pressure ventilator (IAPV) A motorized inflatable bladder that fits over the abdomen and assists spontaneous breathing. The motor inflates the bladder, which in turn pushes the diaphragm upward to facilitate exhalation. When the bladder deflates, the diaphragm returns to its resting position allowing for passive inhalation. See *pneumobelt*,

intermittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB) The application of positive pressure breaths to the upper airway on a periodic basis; used to provide short-term or intermittent mechanical ventilation for the purpose of augmenting lung expansion, delivering aerosol medication, or assisting ventilation.

**intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)** A general term for mechanical ventilation provided by positive pressure. The acronym *IPPV* can also be used to mean *invasive positive pressure ventilation* in which the patient has an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place to connect to the ventilator.

**internal pneumatic circuit** A series of gas-conducting tubes on the inside of a ventilator that direct gas flow within the ventilator to the outside of the ventilator for delivery to the patient.

internal respiration Movement of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the cells and blood.

**international normalized ratio (PT/INR)** Calculation made to standardize prothrombin time. INR depends on the ratio of the patient's prothrombin time and the normal mean prothrombin time. Prothrombin time shows how fast the blood clots in patients receiving oral anticoagulant medication.

intrinsic PEEP (PEEP<sub>I</sub>) See auto-PEEP.

**iron lung** A negative pressure ventilator. Also called a *tank* ventilator, artificial lung, or Drinker respirator.

**ischemia** A reduction in the flow or supply of oxygenated blood to a body organ or area; may be accompanied by severe pain and organ dysfunction (e.g., cardiac ischemia when an adequate oxygenated blood flow to the heart is lacking).

ischemic Condition characterized by a deficiency of blood supply to an organ.

**isothermic saturation boundary** The point in the airway where inspired air is warmed and humidified to 100% relative humidity at 37°C and contains 44 mg/L of water (absolute humidity). This point is approximately at the level of the fourth to fifth generation of subsegmental bronchi and varies with rate of gas flow, minute ventilation, and ambient air conditions.

# K

ketoacidosis Acidosis accompanied by an increase in ketones; occurs primarily as a complication of diabetes mellitus. kinetic therapy The use of automated rotating beds to reduce the incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), particularly in surgical patients or patients with neurologic problems.

#### L

late-onset pneumonia Pneumonia that develops later than 72 hours after exposure to a hospital or clinic setting.

**limit variable** The phase variable whose size is set at some predetermined maximum that cannot be exceeded during inspiration.

lower inflection point A point of significant change in the slope of a static pressure—volume curve at the beginning of lung inflation; indicates the pressure at which large numbers of alveoli are beginning to be recruited; sometimes called  $P_{\rm flex}$ .

## M

mandatory breaths Breaths for which the ventilator determines the start time (time triggered based on the set rate) or the volume (volume targeted) or pressure (pressure targeted) or both the start time *and* the tidal volume or pressure delivered.

mandatory minute ventilation (MMV) A closed-loop system in which the ventilator monitors set parameters and makes adjustments based on those parameters and the patient's spontaneous breathing efforts. The operator sets a minute ventilation ( $\dot{V}_{\rm E}$ ) lower than the patient's spontaneous  $\dot{V}_{\rm E}$ . If monitored  $\dot{V}_{\rm E}$  falls below the minimum set  $\dot{V}_{\rm E}$ , the ventilator increases support to the patient, and vice versa. Also called minimum  $\dot{V}_{\rm E}$ .

mask pressure Term often used to describe the airway opening pressure.

mechanical dead space The amount of rebreathed volume in a ventilator circuit.

meconium aspiration syndrome The inhalation of meconium by the fetus or newborn, resulting in blockage of the airways, failure of the lungs to expand, potential pneumonia, and possible respiratory failure. metabolic monitor Device used to measure concentrations of inspired and expired gases (i.e., oxygen and carbon dioxide), as well as sensors for measuring the volume and/or flow of respired gases. microprocessors Integrated electronic circuits that contain the central processing unit functions of a computer.

minute ventilation The volume of gas per minute inhaled or exhaled from a person's lungs. The calculation of minute ventilation is the product of rate and tidal volume.

miosis The constriction of the pupil of the eye to 2 mm or less. mode Term used to describe various mechanical ventilator strategies employed to deliver a breath. Ventilator modes are typically characterized by how an inhalation is initiated and ends and how exhalation begins.

mouth pressure  $(P_M)$  Pressure at the upper airway (mouth); also called airway opening pressure  $(P_{awo})$ , airway pressure  $(P_{aw})$ , upper airway pressure, mask pressure, and proximal airway pressure. multidrug-resistant (MDR) microorganism A bacteria that resists distinct drugs or chemicals of a wide variety of structure and function targeted at eradicating the organism.

multiple organ failure Modified organ function in an acutely ill patient requiring medical treatment to achieve homeostasis. multisystem organ failure (multiple organ dysfunction syndrome [MODS]) Severe pathological failure occurring all at once of many organ systems, such as the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, liver, and heart; may accompany acute lung injury or acute respiratory distress syndrome.

## Ν

**negative end-expiratory pressure (NEEP)** Negative pressure applied to the airway at the end of exhalation during mechanical ventilation. **neonate** A newborn younger than 4 weeks of age.

neurally adjusted ventilator assist (NAVA) A mode of mechanical ventilation that provides respiratory assistance for the patient in comparison to and in synchrony with the patient's respiratory efforts.

**nocturnal hypoventilation** An elevated P<sub>a</sub>CO<sub>2</sub> and accompanying fall in oxygen saturation that occurs in response to a progressive fall in minute ventilation occurring during sleep, most often in the rapid eye movement (REM) stage.

**nondepolarizing agents** Agents that causes skeletal muscle paralysis by causing competitive inhibition of acetylcholine at the muscle receptor site.

**noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIV)** Delivery of positive pressure mechanical ventilation to the lungs without the use of an artificial airway.

nosocomial infections Infections in hospitals and other health care facilities.

## 0

obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) A condition characterized by episodes of breathing cessation during sleep. Relaxation of the muscles of the upper part of the throat during sleep causes the upper airway to close, blocking the upper airway (oropharynx) and preventing air from entering the lungs. This results in failure of air movement through the obstructed passage while breathing efforts persist. At least five episodes of apnea (lack of air movement) lasting 10 or more seconds are characteristic of OSA.

oliguria A diminished output of urine relative to fluid intake.

open-loop system A control scheme in which a variable is set and
the operating system makes no comparisons between output and
input signals and no changes to the designated variable; an
"unintelligent" system; the opposite of a closed-loop system.

operational verification procedure (OVP) A checklist used to verify
that the ventilator systems are fully functional and safe before use
with a patient; sometimes a part of the respiratory therapy
department's policy and procedure manual. The self-test performed
by the ventilator may be part of the OVP.

**overdistention** See *overinflation* and *hyperinflation*. **overinflation** When excessive pressure or volume delivery during mechanical ventilation causes too much stretching of lung parenchyma; overdistention or hyperinflation.

#### P

paradoxical breathing Abnormal breathing pattern characterized by movement of the thorax outward during expiration and collapsing inward during a spontaneous breath.

paralytic agents Drugs used to facilitate invasive procedures (e.g., surgery, endotracheal intubation) and to prevent movement and ensure the stability of artificial airways. Paralysis may also be used to decrease mean airway pressure  $(P_{aw})$  during uncoordinated or uncontrolled mechanical ventilation.

partial ventilatory support (PVS) Any amount of mechanical ventilation with ventilator rates that are less than those used with continuous mandatory ventilation (CMV), in which the patient is participating in the work of breathing to help maintain effective alveolar ventilation.

patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) An abnormal opening between the pulmonary artery and the aorta resulting when the ductus arteriosus does not close at birth.

patient circuit A series of gas-conducting tubes that conduct gas from the ventilator output connector to the patient and from the patient to the ventilator exhalation valve; also called the *ventilator circuit* 

patient triggering When inspiration begins because of the ventilator sensing a change in pressure, flow, or volume as a result of a patient effort.

**patient—ventilator asynchrony** A situation in which the patient breathing pattern and ventilator breathing pattern are not harmonious.

patient—ventilator system check See ventilator flow sheet. peak airway pressure The highest pressure achieved during inspiration on positive pressure ventilation; also called *peak pressure* and *peak inspiratory pressure*.

peak inspiratory pressure See peak airway pressure.

peak pressure See peak airway pressure.

pediatric An infant, child, and adolescent from birth to 21 years of age.

perivascular Pertaining to an area around a blood vessel. permissive hypercapnia Higher than normal  $P_aCO_2$  values resulting from ventilator strategies used to protect the lung from injury associated with the ventilator.

**phase variable** A signal that is measured and used by the ventilator to begin some part (phase) of the breathing cycle.

physiological shunt The total shunt fraction.

plateau pressure A pressure measurement taken during positive pressure ventilation after a breath has been delivered to the patient and before exhalation has begun. A condition of no flow exists, reflecting the pressure in the lungs and patient circuit.

**pneumobelt** A belt containing a bladder that inflates during exhalation to move the diaphragm upward (cephalad) to assist exhalation. Inhalation is passive.

**polymicrobial infection** Infection by multiple pathogenic microorganisms.

polyneuritis Inflammation of many nerves at once or disseminated neuritis.

positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) Pressure above atmospheric, applied to the airway during exhalation, that increases the functional residual capacity.

**preload** The filling pressure of the ventricle at the end of ventricular diastole.

**pressure augmentation** Dual-control mode that provides pressure-limited ventilation with volume delivery targeted for each breath. **pressure control** A mode of ventilation that is normally patient or time triggered, pressure targeted, and time cycled.

Glossary 553

**pressure cycling** Inspiration ends when the ventilator measures a set pressure during inspiration.

pressure gradient A pressure difference between two points, one pressure being higher than the other.

**pressure limiting** A set maximum pressure that cannot be exceeded. **pressure support** A mode of ventilation that is normally patient triggered, pressure targeted, and flow cycled.

pressure-targeted ventilators Ventilators that provide multiple modes for presetting the maximum inflation pressure rather than a fixed tidal volume.

**pressure triggering** When a change in pressure starts gas flow from the ventilator to deliver inspiration.

**problem** An unwelcome or harmful matter requiring immediate attention that must be dealt with and overcome.

**prone positioning** Placing the body with the chest (ventral side) down and back (dorsal side) up.

**prophylactic therapy** Therapy aimed at defending against or preventing disease.

protected specimen brush (PBS) An invasive microbiologic procedure to culture lower respiratory secretions often necessary to ensure effective treatment of patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP).

proximal airway pressure Term used to indicate an estimate of the alveolar distending pressure.

pruritus Itching leading to the desire to scratch.

**pulmonary angiogram** A radiological image of the pulmonary vasculature bed obtained by injecting an opaque contrast medium into the pulmonary circulation.

**pulmonary artery catheter (PAC)** A long, thin flow-directed tube with a balloon tip on the end (also known as *Swan-Ganz*) that allows it to flow into the right chamber of the heart. **pulmonary vascular resistance** The afterload the right ventricle

must overcome to eject blood into the pulmonary circulation.

pulse Vibrating sensation or sound that is associated with expansion and contraction of the arteries as blood is propelled through them.

pulse oximetry A technique that uses a sensor placed on a digit, an earlobe, the forehead, or the bridge of the nose to determine oxygen saturation and pulse rate. Pulse oximetry actually combines two physical techniques: the spectrophotometric technique, which is used to determine a patient's percent arterial oxyhemoglobin; and optical plethysmography, which is used to estimate the pulse rate.

**pulse pressure** The difference between the systolic and diastolic pressure.

**pulsus paradoxus** A systolic blood pressure that is more than 10 mm Hg lower during inspiration than during expiration.

# Q

qualitative Measures the quality of something rather than its quantity.

**quantitative** Measures the quantity of something rather than its quality.

# R

ramp A comfort feature incorporated in many noninvasive pressure-targeted ventilators that allows an incremental rise in set pressures over a set period of time; most often used in conjunction with the *delay time control*.

Ramsay Sedation Scale A graduated single-category scale used to assess the level of sedation in an individual receiving sedation. recruitment maneuver Denotes activating an intentional transient increase in transpulmonary pressure to open unstable airless alveoli

relative humidity The actual or absolute amount of humidity in a gas compared with its maximum carrying capacity at that

temperature, calculated as a percent. Relative humidity (absolute)/ (maximum capacity)  $\times$  100.

rescue therapy A life-threatening event requiring nonsurgical treatment.

residual volume The volume of air in the lungs after a maximum exhalation.

resistance Frictional forces associated with ventilation due to the anatomical structure of the conductive airways and the resistance to gas flow through the airways, and the tissue viscous resistance of the lungs and adjacent tissues and organs as the lungs expand and contract.

**respiration** The movement of gas molecules across a membrane. **respiratory alternans** Alternation between using the diaphragm to breathe and the accessory muscles of respiration; an indication of end-stage respiratory muscle fatigue.

respirometer A device used to measure breathing variables such as tidal volume and vital capacity.

respite care Allowing caregivers of a ventilator-assisted individual to have an opportunity to rest and relax by providing another caregiver to care for the patient.

retrograde To direct or turn backward.

**rocking bed** A motorized bed that moves continuously in a longitudinal plane. Expiration is assisted when the head is in the down position and the abdominal contents and diaphragm are moved by gravity toward the thorax (cephalad).

# S

scalar A way to specify the waveforms for pressure, flow, and volume that are graphed against time (e.g., pressure, flow, volume scalars). The resulting waveform is referred to as a *scalar*, sedatives Used to reduce anxiety and agitation and to promote sleep and anterograde amnesia.

**silent chest** Term used to describe the absence of audible breath sounds in a patient experiencing a severe asthma exacerbation. It is characterized by the absence of wheezing due to severe airway obstruction.

**simethicone agents** A nonprescription agent that reduces the surface tension of gas bubbles in the stomach.

**single-circuit ventilator** A ventilator in which the internal pneumatic circuit allows the gas to go directly from its power source into the patient.

spontaneous breaths A breath or inspiratory gas flow that is started by the patient (patient triggered) and tidal volume delivery is determined by the patient (patient cycled). With spontaneous breaths, the amount of volume and/or pressure delivered is based on patient demand and not by a preselected amount set on a ventilator. static compliance/static effective compliance Compliance

measurement obtained during conditions of no gas flow. Compliance is equal to a volume change divided by a pressure change.

status asthmaticus A severe and prolonged asthma episode that is poorly responsive to adrenergic agents; associated with decreased airway diameter due to bronchospasm, increased mucous plugging, and inflammation of the airway. Signs and symptoms of potential respiratory failure may be present.

stroke index Stroke volume divided by body surface area. stroke work Cardiac work; calculated by using mean blood pressure multiplied by the stroke volume multiplied by a correction factor. superinfections Infections that develop during drug treatment for another infection, caused by a different microorganism that is resistant to the treatment used for the first infection.

**Swan-Ganz catheter** A multilumen, balloon-tipped, pulmonary artery catheter originally designed by Swan, Ganz, and colleagues. **system compressibility** See tubing compliance for a description of system compressibility.

**systemic vascular resistance** The afterload the left ventricle must overcome to eject blood into the aorta and systemic circulation.

# T

tachycardia Heart rates in the adult greater than 100 beats/min. threshold resistor A device that provides a constant pressure throughout expiration regardless of the rate of gas flow; used in the exhalation line of a ventilator. The exhaled air proceeds unimpeded through the resistor until pressure falls to a preset value (PEEP). At that time, the exhaled gas flow stops and the system pressure is maintained.

thrombolytic therapy Drug therapy directed at dissolving a clot (e.g., administration of streptokinase or urokinase to dissolve an arterial clot in a patient with an acute myocardial infarction resulting from clots in the coronary vessels).

**thrombotic mediators** Chemical substances produced by the body that cause an abnormal vascular condition, resulting in a clot developing inside a blood vessel in the body.

time constant The product of compliance (C) and resistance (R). time cycling When the ventilator ends inspiration after measuring a specific time that has elapsed during the inspiratory phase. time triggering The beginning of inspiration initiated by a ventilator when it detects that a certain period of time has elapsed. Time is commonly based on a rate or frequency control setting. tracheoesophageal fistula A congenital malformation resulting in a tubelike opening between the trachea and esophagus.

tracheomalacia Erosion of the tracheal wall, often associated with excessive pressure from an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube cuff, which reduces effective blood flow through the tracheal wall, resulting in injury to the tissue.

**train-of-four monitoring** An electrophysiological technique used to assess the effectiveness of neuromuscular blocking agents. An electrical current consisting of four impulses is applied to the peripheral nerve over 2 seconds, and the muscle contractions (twitches) produced provide information about the level of muscle paralysis.

**transairway pressure** The difference between airway pressure and alveolar pressure.

transcutaneous monitoring A noninvasive method of indirectly assessing ABGs. Unlike pulse oximetry and capnography, which rely on spectrophotometric analysis, transcutaneous monitoring uses modified blood gas electrodes to measure the oxygen and carbon dioxide tensions at the skin surface.

**transpulmonary pressure** The difference between alveolar pressure and pleural pressure.

**transpyloric** Across the pyloric region of the stomach. **transrespiratory pressure** The difference between airway opening pressure and body surface pressure ( $P_{TR} = P_{awo} - P_{bs}$ ). **transthoracic pressure** The difference between alveolar pressure and body surface pressure; also called *trans-chest wall pressure*. **trigger variable** The phase variable that begins inspiration. **tubing compliance** ( $C_T$ ) System compressibility; reflects the amount (in milliliters) of gas compressed in the ventilator circuit for every

centimeter of water pressure generated by the ventilator during the inspiratory phase. ( $C_T = \text{Change in volume divided by change in pressure } [\Delta V/\Delta P]$  in mL/cm  $H_2O$ ).

#### U

**upper airway pressure** Term used to describe airway opening pressure.

**upper inflection point** A point of significant change in the upper slope of a static pressure—volume curve at the end of lung inflation near total lung capacity (TLC). The change indicates a point at which large numbers of alveoli are being overinflated. **user interface** The dials, knobs, controls, and touch screen devices used by the ventilator operator to determine how the ventilator will function.

#### V

ventilation The movement of air into and out of the lungs. ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) Pneumonia that develops 48 hours after a patient has been placed on mechanical ventilation. ventilator flow sheet A regularly performed check of the patient—ventilator system, usually done by the respiratory therapy staff; includes patient assessment data, monitored information, and ventilator parameters or parameter changes. Can be handwritten or computer based and is usually performed every 2 to 4 hours, unless an unusual event requires earlier checking.

vital capacity (VC) The total amount of air that can be exhaled after a maximum inspiration. The sum of the inspiratory reserve volume, the tidal volume ( $V_T$ ), and the expiratory reserve volume. volume-controlled ventilation Mechanical ventilatory mode in which a specific tidal volume is set and delivered for each breath. volume cycled Inspiration ends when a preset volume is delivered to the patient.

volume limiting A maximum volume set by the clinician that is set and cannot be exceeded.

**volume triggering** When the ventilator detects a small drop in volume in the patient circuit during the latter part of exhalation and begins inspiration.

volutrauma A form of lung injury associated with excessive volume delivery by a ventilator, resulting in tissue injury at the alveolar level

## W

weaning The process of discontinuing ventilation and liberating the patient from the ventilator.

## 7

**zero end-expiratory pressure** (**ZEEP**) A baseline pressure of zero during the expiratory phase of mechanical ventilation.